Good day.
My name is Natalya Ivanovna Dmitrieva.
The World Trade Organization
changes the Russian
economy.
In the course of international
economic relations we considered
with you that one of the forms
of international economic relations
is interstate
regulation of foreign
trade relations.
The organizations involved in this process
are, first of all, the International
Monetary Fund, the World Bank,
the Bank for International Settlements.
The World Trade Organization is one
of the international organizations
that regulates foreign economic
relations within the framework
of the activities of about 150 countries.
The World Trade Organization
(WTO) is the first organization
that regulates trade relations.
The history of the establishment
of the World Trade Organization.
In the postwar period of 47 years,
as we already know, the countries
of Europe were moving to remove
barriers, because in the postwar
period the barriers were so
high that they were essentially prohibitive.
The assistance of the United States of America
under the Marshal Plan envisaged the
fulfillment by all countries of
the future European Union of the
conditions of liberalization
of foreign trade relations.
Therefore, negotiations within
the ministries of countries that would
like to liberalize their
international relations began almost
immediately in the post-war period.
We talked for a long time,
as you and I know, there
were a lot of rounds.
Each round lasted for more than
a year, but the General
Trade Tariff Agreement
was eventually signed.
The agreements that were reached
and signed within the framework of
the GATT then formed the basis
for the next stage of development
of international regulation of
foreign trade, namely the creation
of the World Trade Organization.
On January 1, 1995, the GATT
was transformed into the
World Trade Organization.
In this case, as far as the
Uruguayan documents signed as
part of the Uruguayan Round, as
you can see on the slide that
took place from 1986 until 1994,
they were the basis of the
World Trade Organization.
At present, the WTO membership is
already 150 countries, which shows
the interest of all the countries in
the world, which maintain active
foreign trade relations, to be included
in the negotiation processes
and interest in participation
in the World Trade Organization.
Most of the WTO member
countries were members of
the General Trade Tariff
Agreement, but a certain
number of countries joined
it quite late.
And if you look at the next
slide, see, for example, Moldova
joined the World Trade Organization
in 2001, and a country
like Saudi Arabia even
in 2005.
In this case, the processes
in recent years have become more
complex for many countries.
Why is?
Because, as you have seen from the
history of the development of
the World Trade Organization, negotiation
processes have been going almost since
1947.
And of course, the major
WTO members who were
on the year-on-year deal made
it easier for them to enter
into their mutual agreements
precisely because they had
been negotiating for almost
decades.
On this basis, a paradoxical
situation arises.
Of course, new countries would
like to join the World Trade
Organization, but the WTO, as
some integration association,
now looks very closely
at those members who claim
to join the World Trade
Organization and try to get
certain preferences from
new members in a more
rigid manner.
The old members, when they joined
the WTO, were assumed to have reached
a certain level of tariff changes
and arrangements, and the
requirement to the old members
was to some extent even
less stringent.
But nevertheless, such a careful attention
is understandable, there are
economic and political interests
in the participating countries, and they
are trying to get all possible preferences
from the emergence of a new country
as a member of the World
Trade Organization.
The WTO is the permanent form
of membership.
This is due to the fact
that the negotiation processes,
WTO rounds are virtually not stopped,
and as we will then look at the
structure of the WTO, a permanent
annual summit is provided within
the framework of the World
Trade Organization to sign
or agree on some future agreements.
In principle, eight rounds of
international trade negotiations
have been held since
1991, and the last round, which
is still in effect, is called
the Millennium Round or
Pre-Round, which, in general,
began in 2000.
The goal of the Dohrund
is to liberalize trade
in agricultural products.
In general, this is the most painful
problem associated with the activities
of the members of the World
Trade Organization.
Until now, most of the WTO
member countries have supported
certain protectionist
measures to protect national
agricultural producers,
believing that their
production conditions are
so, so to say, difficult that
the state is obliged
to support them and
stimulate the development
of domestic agricultural
production.
A study conducted by the World
Bank in the late 1990s on the
liberalization model, so
to speak, showed that if possible,
of course, there are three
variants.
The first option is such a general
and complete liberalization
of international economic relations.
The second option is an intermediate
option, when, so to speak,
liberalization will reach some
such average level.
So, under the forecast
of specialists, if the
pig farm barriers are removed,
then the developing countries,
including new market economies,
I mean Russia, are the
winners.
From this, it is clear what
serious interests are facing
within the problems
of pig liberalization.
These are European
producers, as the European
Union is known to spend
50% of its EU budget
on supporting
its pig farmers.
At the same time, the United States, walking
and accusing Europe of direct protectionism
in supporting its
agricultural experience.
Nevertheless, the United States also
in the late 1990s carried out an intra-
national program for modernizing
agriculture, to stimulate
the intensification of production.
And accordingly, within this program
there were also options for financial
support of the organization.
The main goal of the agreement
is to further liberalize
world trade and ensure
fair competition.
As we discussed with you in the course
of international economic relations,
the principle that the second best
is not given, namely, better than
liberal economic relations, which
involve the rapid development
of export relations, has not
yet been invented by mankind.
Another thing is that at some stage
of its development, each country
defends its national interests,
considers the situation that
develops in the national
economy, and within the economic
cycle, if there is a situation
of recession, crisis or
some threat, in particular
to agriculture, then it
tries to protect its national
producers.
Therefore, the national interests
of some individual countries may
go against the interests of
the world community, which is
interested in the general liberalization
of international trade,
as such will lead to a more rational
redistribution of
resources in the world, their
effective use, and, consequently,
will lead to the growth
of the world gross product.
What are the specific goals of the
World Trade Organization?
First of all, they aim to
support existing agreements,
track them, and, so to
speak, live.
Namely, the agreements on trade in
services and agreements that have
been signed in the last decade,
almost the decade of
the twentieth century.
This is practically an agreement
within the WTO, not within,
so to speak, the GAD.
This is the TRIMS agreement, which bears the name.
This is the agreement on trade
aspects of the transfer of intellectual
property rights and the TRIMS
agreement, that is, an
agreement between countries
on trade aspects of investment
measures.
Of course, the current goal,
as I said, within the Doharound
is to create a new agreement
on retail products.
What are the basic principles of GAD?
First of all, it is assumed that
it is within this agreement that
the regime of the greatest favor
works most adequately.
What is his main idea?
It is assumed that the member countries, when
arranging foreign trade relations,
are oriented to the fact that the conditions
of trade between the countries
will be no worse than the conditions
between other member countries.
Thus, it is assumed that the countries will
not increase the tariffs that have already
been introduced between the other member countries.
That is, in essence, it is
an agreement on a certain level
of protectionist protection.
The next principle of the General
Agreement on Trade and Tariffs is
the mutual granting of national
treatment.
What is meant here?
In this case, the main purpose
of this agreement is to create a
situation in which the importer
would have on its own producers,
that is, it would be granted
the same rights as its producers,
which would increase competition
for national producers
and from the point of
view of general economic
theory would increase the
overall efficiency
of these national producers.
The next principle of the GAD
is regulation of trade
primarily by tariff methods.
We have again understood that
in the framework of state
regulation of foreign trade,
various methods are used,
and one of the most rigid
methods that generally reduces
the income of the state,
and most importantly, tightly
block the trade flows,
is quota, that is, physical
restriction of exports.
In contrast, tariff methods allow countries
- exporters, producers - exporters
themselves to choose the situation,
whether they want to import goods
to this country under such tariffs
and restrictions or not.
In particular, if it is large
enough firms that are
interested in seizing
the national local market, they
will go on to pay even higher
tariffs, and protectionism
in this case will not have
such a force.
That is, the level of the real rate
of tariff protection will be much
lower, precisely because these
large exporters for such market
penetration can slightly reduce
their entry prices.
Then in this case, the price will
not rise in the domestic market
as much as it would have risen
with the increase of tariffs and
the absence of a drop in world
prices.
On the other hand, in this case,
although consumers win,
some producers of
the national economy lose.
But the main idea is that the
competitiveness factor and
the maintenance of the competitiveness
of national producers will
act, and these firms, foreign
competitors, will push
national producers
to some measures to change
their production.
This factor is positive.
The following principle of
GAD is related to the refusal
to use quantitative restrictions.
The quantitative restrictions
in this case, I will remind
you, include not only quotas,
but rather strict licensing and,
accordingly, various measures
associated with the distribution
of these licenses, often
not on a competitive basis,
on the basis of the decision
of any government officials.
In this case, the abandonment
of quantitative restrictions
means a world that is acting to
increase transparency of
the country’s economic policy,
insofar as, as I have said, the
decision to give license to some
officials or not to give, contributes
to the rent-oriented behavior
of politicians, and, therefore,
the possibility of developing
corrupt relations
that will undoubtedly
undermine international
competition.
The next principle that is related
to the activities of
the General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade is the transparency
or transparency of trade policy.
It is, of course, related to the fact
that if countries decide, first,
to limit quantitative restrictions,
develop a policy that will
be understandable to both countries,
both the exporter and the importer,
will reduce the risk factor
that arises in connection
with the inefficiency
of policy in decision-making
by somehow reducing opacity
of economic activity,
will contribute to
the development of international
foreign trade.
The last principle I would like to
draw your attention to is the settlement
of trade disputes through consultation,
first and foremost, and negotiations.
This system, which exists within the
framework of the General Agreement
on Trade Tariffs, attracts
many countries, as it is sufficiently
effective and there are
many appeals from member
countries to resolve trade disputes.
What are the main functions of the World
Trade Organization?
The first function is, of course,
the function of monitoring the
implementation of those agreements
that have already been reached
within the WTO.
The second direction, functional
WTO, is to conduct multilateral
trade negotiations in order
to eventually make further
decisions on liberalizing
international economic
relations.
Solution of trade disputes,
of course, trade wars do
not lead to improved
welfare of any of the parties
involved in these trade
wars.
Usually, the country of import and the
country of export are losers.
The next functional direction
of the WTO is monitoring the
national trade policies of the
member countries.
It is an interesting area, which
I will discuss in more detail later.
Technical assistance to
developing countries for the development
of export-related programs.
This technical assistance
is primarily for international
trade.
The next direction is cooperation
with international specialized
organizations, both within
the WTO and those subdivisions
that are related to the
UN, the United Nations.
What are the main advantages of WTO
membership?
First of all, such fundamental advantages
can be highlighted here.
First, relations between countries
members of the WTO are more predictable.
Why is?
Because it is assumed that
before signing an agreement within
the WTO, all parties that
are interested in this,
so to speak, signing
this agreement, they
must consult.
This does not mean that
all 150 WTO member countries
will sign the agreement
with each other.
It is assumed that from this group
will simply stand out, for example,
a group of countries that
are interested in the aspect
that is being developed at
this time.
For example, let’s take the
agreement on the liberalization
of agricultural products.
Not all 150 countries, but
those that are exporting
or importing agricultural
products, will take
part in these negotiations.
So, the predictability of trade relations,
it is guaranteed in this case
by the correct WTO
prescribed.
And here in this same section we need
to talk about the transparency
of the foreign economic policy of
the member countries, which
is supported by various WTO
activities, in particular, by
the analysis of foreign trade policy,
which is regularly conducted
for one country or another.
Eliminating discrimination
in trade is also an advantage, since
the principle of non-discrimination
is the second fundamental principle
of a trade organisation,
which implies that unreasonable
discriminatory measures cannot
be applied against
a member country.
Access to the WTO Dispute Resolution
Mechanism.
This advantage is to be obtained
by all those countries that at
this stage of time are trying
to enter the WTO and are negotiating
the entry of the all-rounder
trade organization.
And the last advantage, which can be
called in the category of the main,
is the participation in the development
of these agreements, that is, participation
in international trade negotiations.
Of course, a WTO member has a greater right
of voice, it is easier to hear than
an outsider from this organization.
What is the legal basis
of a trade organization?
The WTO system could be called a multilateral
contract that involves the signing
of a whole package of
agreements.
The WTO rules are practically
applied to most countries, as I
have said, the 150 most active
trading partners, and 97
percent of world trade is controlled
by the World Trade
Organization within the
framework of these rules.
The Uruguay Round, which
is the basis of the WTO,
has about 50 agreements.
What are the principles of decision-making
in the World Trade Organization?
This is the consensus method.
It is expected that there are
very long negotiations between
all interested in making this decision.
It is supposed that it is better to
shake down all the disputed issues,
to remove them, than to leave
a losing side to the very
minority, which is dissatisfied
and not satisfied with the decision
that, suppose, the World
Trade Organization will take.
In principle, the
WTO statute allows
the use of voting
method by a
majority vote.
But this practice has not been implemented
by the World Trade Organization
so far.
It is the consensus method that allows
to conclude such contractual
relationships that are stable
and that all WTO member
countries are satisfied with.
What is the decision-making
structure within the
World Trade Organization?
First of all, it is a ministerial
conference, which meets once
every two years.
The Ministerial Conference
is the legislative
body.
Multilateral agreements,
packages of agreements are being
signed or negotiations are
being held on some issue in order
to further remove those issues
that have not been resolved
at the moment of the negotiation
round.
In this case, it is a
legislative body.
All the branches of the World
Trade Organization are not
legislative bodies, but
executive, so to speak, governmental
structures that help
implement the decisions
of the World Trade Organization.
The General Council is the most
important executive body, usually
composed of ambassadors and
heads of delegations.
Please look at the slide that represents
the most generalized structure
of the peace trade
organization.
The Ministerial Conference
is, as we say, a legislative
body.
The WTO General Council as
the executive body.
The General Council is bound
by three functional councils.
It is the Council on Trade in Goods,
the Council on Trade and the Council
on Trade Aspects of Intellectual
Property Rights.
Besides the councils
of such auxiliary, there are trade
and development committees, budget
committees, etc., which help
the WTO General Council
perform its administrative
functions.
As I said before, there is
a WTO secretariat, but the secretariat
does not have legislative functions
and does not make decisions.
This is a service body.
Let us now turn to the issue
of Russian foreign trade in order
to finally understand why Russia
needs to join the World Trade
Organization.
On the one hand, yes,
we looked at the whole
block of benefits that WTO
members receive, and especially
those members that have
just joined the WTO.
But on the other hand, as I said,
there is a situation where new members
are subjected to more stringent requirements
than those members who were
at the origin of the GAD.
Accordingly, each country, before
joining the World Trade Organization,
must weigh all the for
and against of joining
the World Trade Organization.
Each country should look at what
concessions it can and cannot make,
and what preferences it should
simply demand from those
countries that are members
of the World Trade Organization.
What are the characteristics of the
Russian export structure?
The term "the world's raw material
surplus" is associated with
Russian exports for almost all
Russian citizens.
This is of course not very pleasant.
The only thing that reassures is that
since the prices of energy in the
framework of the modern climate
are constantly rising, it gives
the opportunity to use some
time lag.
This is a chance for oil or gas
dollars to invest in the
national economy of Russia and
try to develop industry
in the direction of export-
oriented industries, but not
related to raw material
exports, namely, products,
first of all, machinery.
As we can see, 63 percent of
Russian exports are fuel
and energy goods.
About 16% are made of metals
and products.
Metals are also quite raw materials-
intensive goods and are associated
with the use of irreplaceable natural
resources of Russia.
And fairly uniform division is associated
with the products of
machinery, chemistry, wood processing.
In the other group we will
probably include food.
If you look at what companies
operate in the Russian export
market, it will prove that
suppose the exporters are the leading
sausage plant, which finally
got a quota in the European
market.
But this is so small a miserable
share in our companies that,
as I said, the main flow of
goods is connected with
that sublime energy
and mental complex.
If we also consider that the class
of machinery products includes
military equipment, then, so to
say, goods not of military production,
and civil production occupy a very
small share of Russia's exports.
Of course, Russia hopes, after joining
the World Trade Organization, that
it will be able to remove some
of the barriers that are already
aimed at more competitive products
in a number of sectors of
the economy.
If, as I said, a agreed export
spa for agricultural products
is eventually created, then, in
principle, the potential of
Russia is huge here.
And, as I said before, the World
Bank calculated at the
end of the 20th century
that the Russian grain producers
would benefit from
this liberalization.
On the other hand, if you take
the metal products, there are
quotas against Russian exports
around the world.
There is no direct export of metals
and products from them on the basis of free competition.
The United States introduced quotas
that were raised in 1998, and this
has also provoked our financial crisis
to some extent.
Germany, say, although
it increases its quota for
exporting metals to Germany
every year, it also
has a quota.
And the most interesting thing is
that as soon as any of the new industrialized
countries master and develop its
metal production, the option
of quota or any kind of
anti-dumping sanctions immediately
arises against Russian exports.
In terms of imports of goods from
Russia, let’s see what the commodity
structure of imports is here.
First of all, 48% are related
to machinery products.
Is it good or bad?
On the one hand, this proves
that our domestic engineering
in most parameters does
not satisfy our domestic
manufacturers using
machines and equipment.
On the other hand, we can say
that this flow of imports
of machinery to the Russian
territory means that many of
our domestic manufacturers
are updating their main
foundations and putting new
equipment more technological,
more productive, which has
a greater productive effect.
And, accordingly, there
is a possibility associated with the
fact that if we supply ourselves
such good products of imported
machinery, then it is on these machines
of equipment that we will be
able to create
quite competitive finished
products, which will take
up not only domestic
food goods and agricultural
raw materials occupy
about 15 percent.
Per this trend is due to the
fact that often our farming
plants, our milk-meat
plants, they were built on
Western technologies in the
early 1990s and they are simply
technologically designed to
supply precisely specially
prepared raw materials
for the production
of finished food industry.
The next, as we see, is the
production of the chemical industry.
In this case, it is sufficient to
import not only finished
components, but also
components for chemical
products, which are
then used in our Russian production.
If you pay attention, then all powders
with the imported name are produced
in Russia, but raw materials and
components, so to speak, for their
production are just imported
on the basis of imported supplies.
The next component, the other.
Of course, there will be
various companies, which
again can have quite good
competition from
domestic producers.
And I, as I said, hope that equipping
our enterprises with
advanced technology and new equipment
in the long term should ultimately
lead to the fact that Russian
imports of goods will
be more adequate to
the demands of the developed
national economy.
But, nevertheless, in recent years, Russian
imports have increased, and this question
we will consider with you.
As for Russia’s foreign
trade turnover, it just
shows where export
and import flows are heading.
See, 51% of our export and import
flows belong to the European
Union, only 18% to the Asia-
Pacific region and a small, so
to speak, smaller percentage
to another group of countries.
The chart shows us that it is not by chance
that the main countries that entered
the commission on Russia’s entry
into the WTO were the members of the
European Union.
For a long time, the European
Union’s representation was commissioned
by its commissions, commissioned
to study Russia’s foreign trade
policy and the EU was the first
block that began coordinating
various issues on Russia’
s accession to the World
Trade Organization.
With regard to the merchandise simplicity
of the structure, the foreign trade
turnover of Russia, we would like
to give another example.
Despite the fact that I said that
mostly our flows go to the European
Union, in the mid-1990s in connection
with the ruble was relatively expensive,
some of the textile enterprises
of Russia were able to
re-equip their production, in particular
enterprises that sew women's
coats.
So in that period of time,
such a paradoxical situation
emerged when the market for wool
coats, sewn by Russian manufacturers
on European medicines,
grew 20 times.
As a result, the relevant organizations
and structures, the U.S. Chamber
of Commerce, were gathered and eventually
a decision was made on dumping
and the decision to avat the
import of the coat.
This is just one of the concrete examples
that point to the fact that the opportunities
of Russian manufacturers associated
with increasing their competitiveness
in the market will be related
to the fact that within the framework
of the World Trade Organization
they will be able to enter
the general system of preferences
and the system of non-
discrimination.
Because now a considerable
proportion of Russian exports
is under discriminatory
regime.
The next thing I would like to draw
your attention to is the country
orientation of Russian foreign trade
based on two blocs of countries, namely
the countries of the near and abroad,
or the countries of the CIS and
the countries of the far abroad,
that is, predominantly developed
countries.
Please note that, in general,
of course, the chart shows
on the chart that Russian exports
are constantly growing and
continue to grow in 2003-2005.
What is the proportion of near
and far abroad?
The share of the near abroad is fairly
stable and the growth is quite small.
But the share of far abroad, just outside
the CIS countries, it simply, for
example, jumped sharply in the
period between 2003 - 2005 and
continues to grow now.
This is not only due to the
energy consumption in these countries,
it is due to the overall level of
income and development in these countries.
The richer the economy, as we have
learned in the course
of international economic relations,
the more opportunities and capabilities
they have to participate
with our country in international
trade.
Certainly the CIS countries, apparently,
after going through the path of market
transformations, I hope to increase the
level of their income and then they will
also become the object of mutual
flows between Russia and the near abroad.
Moreover, we are connected
by quite large historical traditions
and although over the past 15-17 years
our production has learned to live
independently and separately, but
nevertheless, as soon as the
crisis situation in these countries
is less, integration
ties, mutually beneficial
ties are again established.
Because the structure of the exports
of the CIS countries is similar to the
structure of Russian exports, these
countries cannot offer the most advanced
technology in the required
volume, the machines of
equipment that occupy a large
share of our imports.
Per, therefore, the ratio of
near and far abroad is as
shown in the scheme
presented to your attention.
Now let’s pay attention to imports.
In this case, the picture is repeated
again and there are no
fundamentally new export
and import solutions.
That is, first of all, imports
from developed countries
and accordingly, as
I said, it is mainly machinery.
And that is why the
competitiveness of the products offered
from developed countries is much higher
than from the countries of the
former socialist community.
In principle, this scheme can change
with the general development
of foreign economic relations.
And let us draw your attention to the
fact that countries that were previously
members of the Council for Mutual
Economic Aid and were part
of the socialist circle are either
already members of the World Trade
Organization or are
claiming to join the
World Trade Organization.
Thus, they also already got the
advantages that Russia is trying
to get by entering it.
And these advantages should
push their foreign trade turnover
and, apparently, relations with
these countries can be more
developed.
These countries are usually
located closely with our
country.
Accordingly, the cost
of transportation of goods, transportation
costs here are quite low
and this advantage is
not yet fully utilized.
Moreover, the salary level in these countries
is much lower than in developed
countries.
Therefore, this is another
absolute advantage that makes
products produced in the territory
of countries close to Russia
more competitive.
And if the positive development
trends in these countries begin
to grow, it is possible that the foreign
trade structure of imports
in the country range for Russia
will change over time.
Look at the Russian foreign
economic indicators.
As you can see, in the last five years,
the situation has changed a bit.
If Russia had a mostly positive
trade balance before 2003,
then, starting in 2004, the
foreign trade balance has
become negative.
What are the reasons for this situation?
The elements of this situation are related,
first of all, to the economic
growth in Russia, which has been
recorded since 2004.
Within the framework of economic theory
it has always been proven that as
soon as the gross domestic product of
the country begins to grow, not only
is the internal confirmation of the axiom
of the theory of international economic
relations manifested in
the external economic
indicators of Russia growing.
So, with the growth of income,
our end consumers and, most
importantly, our producers
agree to buy a larger share
of imported products in order
to raise both their standard
of living and to upgrade
the production that should
be more competitive.
Another factor that affects the fact
that, since 2004, the foreign trade
saldo has become negative in Russia
is related to the fact that the Russian
ruble rate is increasing methodically.
Despite the intervention that the Central
Bank regularly conducts on the currency
market, it is still not possible
to reduce the exchange rate
sharply enough.
We considered that if the currency
rate of a country increases, it
will one way or another lead
to a trend of decreasing exports
and increasing imports.
Why is?
Because the ruble is becoming more
expensive, and now we can
exchange more foreign currency
for a more stable, expensive ruble
and, accordingly, buy more
imported goods.
On the contrary, the foreign
consumer of Russian exports is facing
a situation where the goods offered
by Russian production have not
only increased in connection with
the increase in global prices,
I mean energy, but
in principle other groups
of export products have increased
precisely because now in
order to buy this goods at the
same price, you need to
exchange more euros or
dollars for rubles.
This leads to a relative increase in
the price of goods.
This situation is also known
to Europe, where Europeans
are not satisfied with the rise
of the euro against the US dollar,
and they even calculated how many
millions of euros they lost
there simply from the six-month
rise of the US dollar.
But I want to draw your attention to the fact
that during this period of time, 2006-2007,
the rise in the ruble is not only associated
with the growth of our exports, it is
associated with the huge influx of
oil dollars and euros on the territory of
Russia, it is also associated with the fact
that the currencies of our foreign
partners, in particular the United States,
are subject to fluctuation.
The period 2006-2005 was marked by
the fact that in this period of
time the dollar rate was steadily
declining.
On the one hand, the Americans
just got export gains from such
a reduction in the ruble rate
and slightly improved their payment
and trade balance.
The US partners, Russia,
should have suffered
from this situation.
As you can see from the table,
I will repeat again, our net
exports increased in negative,
it became unbalanced.
As the US market is changing in
the stabilization of the dollar,
this trend was already marked
in 2007, when the US Central
Bank has already raised the refinancing
rate by a percentage
point, which gives the
opportunity to balance
Russia’s foreign trade
flows.
As you can see, exports and imports
are influenced by a large
number of factors, both currency
and demand.
In terms of demand, I would like
to point out that the growth of
our exports will still depend on
the growth of gross domestic
product abroad.
That is, as far as countries, the
main consumers of our exports,
I mean Western Europe, as you
saw on the chart, is 60% of our
exports, as far as Western
Europe will maintain a stable
economic growth, so much
our goods in the Western
European market will
be in demand.
If, God give it, their development
is somehow disrupted and there is some
economic decline, then our exports
may be reduced even more,
and for us this will be an
unwanted situation.
From my example, you can see
how closely connected
all countries in the world are
by export and import flows.
Therefore, in principle, the common
prosperity of one country cannot be
without the prosperity of neighbors
and more distant neighbors, since these
interrelated export-import flows
raise the overall economic development
of all countries in the world.
Based on this, it is clear why the
countries outside the World
Trade Organization are trying
to join this negotiating integration
process and participate in the
World Trade Organization
rauts, to be an equal member
of the World Trade Organization.
Look at the following chart for the
dynamics of export and import in the
last period of time.
The balance of foreign trade
is generally positive.
As you can see, these red-yellow
stripes reflect the positive
balance of foreign
trade on the chart.
And this is due to the fact that prices
are generally on a positive balance
of the year 2005.
Prices of Russian exports have
increased.
Based on this, the volume of Russian
value exports in some periods
of time increases due to the price
jump.
Pay attention to 2007.
In January, both imports
and exports fell.
Probably it is tradition.
See, again in January 2005 the decline,
it is the tradition of falling
demand in Christmas some New Year
period of time, and then
the trend of international
trade is gaining strength
again.
What are the objectives and objectives of Russia’
s accession to the World Trade Organization?
Of course, these goals can be
formulated in connection with the
benefits that any country that has
become a member of the World
Trade Organization receives.
The first goal is to obtain
non-discriminatory conditions
for access to foreign markets
for Russian products.
As I have already given an example,
there are quite strict rules
of discrimination on a number
of goods that are quite
competitive in the world market.
Furthermore, access to the mechanism
for settling trade disputes, which
is well-developed within
the framework of the World Trade
Organization, is very important
for Russia and is not accidentally
used by more and more
WTO member countries.
On the other hand, if we become
members of the WTO, it means that
in principle most countries
in the world do not conflict
with us on trade, commodity and other
positions that fall within
the jurisdiction of the WTO.
Our foreign policy
is becoming more
predictable.
When countries join the World Trade
Organization, one of the requirements
in the WTO process is the harmonization
of domestic laws with WTO rules
and norms, with international,
so to speak, standards.
International standards
envisage the liberalization
of domestic legislation in
relation to foreign investors.
Thus, creating a blatant
clearing for investment is
also one of the goals of Russia’
s accession to the WTO.
If you look at the statistics,
investors have reacted
very strongly to the fact that in
2006-2007 Russia was facing
a violent conviction with
all conflicting countries
or interested countries about
joining the WTO.
And we have an influx of foreign
investment into Russia increased
to almost 40% in the first
quarter of 2007 compared to the
first quarter of 2006.
Why this happens?
It appears that foreign investors
are expecting Russia’s accession
to the WTO and are trying to take
positions in advance.
There is also a flow of reinvestments.
When domestic producers who
exported excess capital
abroad because they saw less
risky use of this capital
on Russian territory,
they were less likely to
invest money abroad, this
capital also begins to
return to the Russian
economy.
This process began in 2003
and continues to this day.
Accordingly, the WTO membership
will be a laxmuse paper,
an indicator that will show
foreign investors to
come, invest, develop,
organize and create new
jobs on modern technologies
in Russia.
Someone is scared of the
arrival of foreign investments
in Russian territory.
But note, even with this seemingly
stormy growth, what figures can
we give – 10, 20, 30 percent growth
over the last few years, nevertheless,
the share of foreign investment
in the total investment
of the domestic economy
is insignificant, that
is, the percentage there rises
slightly to 10 percent.
In this case, Russia does
not experience any investment
risk.
Well, if we recall the examples of new
industrialized countries that have
rapidly developed exports of developing
industries, and not raw materials,
namely industrial, then these exports
developed industries, first of
all, were created at the expense
of foreign investments.
Russia has in this case favorable
opportunities for implementation
of such investment plans.
In addition to the fact that these plans
will be beneficial to domestic consumers,
but it is also possible that Russian
products will go to the foreign
market from such imported sources
of production.
What does it have to do with?
First of all, in Russia, sufficiently
developed, educated industrial
personnel.
And while we, so to speak, have
not yet spread this potential, it is
possible that when training personnel
in accordance with new technologies
of marketing and management,
which are generally occurring
in a number of our domestic
enterprises, will allow
to attract domestic workforce.
And it will attract foreign investors
in Russia not only cheap raw
materials and energy, but also
the possibility of organizing
such competitive production.
The next factor that will affect Russia’
s accession to the WTO is the possibility
of increasing I have already said
in the current international economic
relations that transnational
corporations are represented not
only in the Western economy and
in the group of developing countries.
In Russia, they are called
international monopolies,
and financial and industrial
groups are called.
So the financial and industrial groups
of Russia, they also already
feel the limitation of
the territorial capabilities
of Russia and agree to invest abroad.
The next task of Russia’s accession
to the WTU is related to the expansion
of opportunities for Russian investors
in the WTU member countries.
The situation in the Russian economy
is so that our transnational
corporations, which I have already
mentioned in the section of international
economic relations, also face
a situation when they do not
find adequate spheres of
application with their capital
on the territory of Russia.
On the other hand, given that our
transnational corporations are closely
related to the gas sector,
namely, Gazprom, then, of
course, construction
and investment applications,
this corporation involves
facilitating the export of
Russian gas abroad.
Therefore, the expansion of such
opportunities for investment
in WTO member countries is also a
significant factor for the
Russian economy.
The establishment of cooperative
ties between countries and WTO
members with the inclusion of
Russia in this industrial cooperation
again may be related to Russian
investments in countries and
in NGOs, so this is a
fairly progressive positive
process, and Russia may look in
this direction from joining the
world trade organizations.
The next factor of Russia’s participation
in the WTO is the creation of conditions
for improving the quality
and competitiveness of the reporting products.
After all, if the relations of the member
countries of the World Trade Organization
require liberalization of foreign
trade, the same requirement will
be introduced to our country.
Of course, the level of liberalization
of our foreign trade relations is already
high enough, but once again, the
access of those foreign competitors
to our market will make domestic
manufacturers think about
increasing the competitiveness
of their products.
And despite the fact that, of course,
such a harsher competition
from the part of foreigners after Russia's
accession to the WTO will not
occur immediately, since each
new member country receives the right
to a certain transitional period,
in the presence of which its
producers will
adapt to the new situation.
However, many manufacturers are
already thinking about the future
and increasing competition in the
Russian market.
And this is reflected in the fact
that on the territory of the Russian
regions are held regular meetings
at the level of heads of regions and
various communities of Russian
industrialists of regional location.
These meetings will help
to figure out what
risks the Russian manufacturers
face when joining the
WTO and what advantages.
And as reports on such meetings
show, it turns out, often
Russian industrialists
and producers have limited information
about the advantages that
the WTO gives and their idea
of how and in what
ways, what steps Russia will
enter the WTO, about what
barriers will remain
for the transitional period
are quite limited.
Based on this, such consultations
with Russian industrial manufacturers,
taking place throughout the territory
of Russia, they promote the
understanding of this process
and produce a positive response
and feedback.
That is, on the one hand, yes,
accept this situation as more
promising for the development of
Russia, and on the other hand,
to think about how to
increase the competitiveness
of its own production.
As analytical studies show,
less than 50% of Russian
manufacturers thought
about Russia’s entry into
the WTO five years ago.
At present, this figure has increased
sharply, and everyone understands,
on the one hand, what advantages,
and on the other hand, what shortcomings
are related to their organizational
activities and how prepared
or not prepared for Russia's accession
to the WTO.
The next factor and task that will
be solved in the framework of Russia’
s accession to the WTO.
This is Russia’s participation in the
development of international trade rules
and compliance with the defense of
its interests, national interests.
I have already mentioned that the Doha
Round is dedicated to developing
the problems of liberalization of agriculture.
In this case, Russia has rich
lands, natural agricultural
resources, opportunities.
There is a high potential for the development
of the agricultural sector.
And in general, its development is
not only in the direction of ensuring
domestic consumption, but also
penetration into the European market.
As the latest history of Russia shows,
our agricultural workers do not
constantly experience the situation of crisis.
Each time period is repeated
a fairly high harvest.
But, as practice shows, often
public procurement
of agricultural products does
not cover the excess supply, for
example, grain and other
agricultural goods.
And then, for the next year,
agricultural producers simply
reduce the volume of their
production supply.
As I said in my course on international
economic relations, such
a surplus situation in the world
free space is usually resolved
by the fact that such naturally
created surpluses, well, and,
of course, by the hard work
of Russian agricultural
workers, they can be
realized precisely by
export.
Russia, in fact, within these all
sorts of quota restrictions,
such chances do not have
or have very limited scale.
In the end, this leads to negative
consequences, in essence, to
overproduction in some periods,
in some years in agriculture,
to the ruin of these
agricultural ones.
The next component, so to speak,
is the benefits for Russia from joining
the World Trade Organization, the
next component is the improvement
of Russia’s image as a full
participant in international
trade.
While Russia is not a WTO
member, certain countries, governments
of certain countries or some
economic agents from some countries
have the opportunity or the opportunity
to discriminate against
Russia and, accordingly,
prove some of their
rights to discriminate
against trade flows.
This is the most case-specific example
of the Venec amendment in the United
States, according to which once
on the socialist Russia were imposed
restrictions on the export of advanced
technologies, on discrimination,
on export-import relations
in connection with the restrictions
that Russia then imposed
on the exit of Jews from Russia.
In this case, despite the fact
that Russia in the new speech,
recognized a market, not a transitional
transformational economy,
the amendment is still in effect.
And the amendment of Jones Venek,
it is clear that it is a
precedent, is to such a discriminatory
attitude of Russia.
Although this amendment is suspended
annually by the US President,
it has not been lifted.
Despite the fact that, suppose, the negotiations
of Russia and the United States on Russia’s accession
to the WTO have already been completed,
and the precedent of the amendment remains.
And the US says that only when Russia becomes
a WTO member, we will then eliminate
this amendment.
In this case, there is no longer
the country against which the amendment
was introduced, the object of the amendment
has changed.
Nevertheless, this is the
political pressure that remains,
and in this case, the image
of confrontation for Russia,
when it enters some international
economic relations, remains.
What are the main objectives of the Russian
accession negotiations to the WTO?
First of all, as I said, we need to
weigh the price of accession, that
is, what benefits and advantages
Russia will get from joining the
WTO, to these benefits and advantages.
On the other hand, what concessions
Russia is prepared to make for this
accession, to what level it should
reduce tariffs and to what extent
it has opened its domestic markets.
We and you remember that the World
Trade Organization does not mean
such a consistent trade.
Although all countries have agreements
on GAD, GAC, TRIPS and TRIMS, each
country, however, imposes within
a certain period of time those
restrictions which they consider
reasonable and reasonable, and
within the framework of the
agreement with the WTO these
restrictions pass.
In this case, the task of Russian representatives
at the negotiations is to greater
advantages or at least to balance
the situation of losses and
benefits from Russia’s
accession to the WTO.
Agreements on GAD goods.
I would like to draw your attention
to the fact that the General
Agreement of 47 years ago, as I
said, was the basis for the
agreement of countries to join
the World Trade Organization.
But before the organization
in the World Trade Organization
there was a new round of negotiations,
and the 94th General Agreement
contains additional positions.
First, the 1994 agreement
contains specific sector
agreements, namely agriculture
and textiles.
In this regard, Russia, joining the WTO
at the present stage, rather than before
the 95th year, just gets some
advantages in this area, that
is, in the development of the
agreement, in the end, participation
in the development
of the agreement on agriculture
and textile.
The next component of GAD
94 is state trade.
There are, of course, negative
points for Russia, because
within these agreements, government
orders on foreign trade must
be distributed on a
basis.
The tradition of the Russian economy
is associated with a
certain vulgarism of officials
who distribute certain
government orders.
The next issue is related to the
standards for different products.
The Russian standards have traditionally
been quite high.
A conditionally primitive example is
how the amount of meat in the high-
quality Russian sausage is usually
higher than the same standards, for
example, concerning the European Union.
But the same standards
are quite strict
in our drugs.
And it is not by chance that, for
example, India recently entered into the discussion
of agreements on Russia’s accession
to the WTO under the GAD section.
India is the largest
exporter of
medicines.
And if Russia stands in the position
of adopting such international standards,
which are usually accepted in the
World Trade Organization, and lower
some of its standards, it is
likely that this country will
get a greater opportunity to
penetrate the Russian market.
As for subsidies.
Indeed, the 1994 agreement
also includes subsidy
issues.
The issue of subsidies is
the most painful issue in modern
doharound negotiations.
Why is?
First of all, it is
about agricultural
export subsidies.
Of course, Russia, becoming
a participant in these negotiations,
can get certain preferences.
And now, before joining
the EU, it must agree on
what level to fix protective
barriers for entitled to subsidies.
The next aspect, which was linked
to the new GATT 1994 version,
is anti-dumping measures.
In this regard, Russia has made
a great progress, because in the new
XXI century anti-dumping legislation
and various on the territory
of Russia and the introduction
of anti-dumping sanctions
were adopted.
I have already said that Russian
export flows are quite strongly limited
in different directions, and
not only in the direction of the United
States and Western Europe,
but even in the direction of the
Asian region, to new developed
countries.
Once the countries have been
able to develop their heavy industry
thoroughly enough, obstacles are
set and proved by the dumping
situation on, for example,
Russian goods, in particular,
metal production.
Now, of course, in general, in connection
with the rise of world prices
for various commodity-intensive
goods, which are the main component
of Russian exports, such
dumping claims from buyers
are coming to Russia less
and less.
This is due to the fact that, for example,
mostly disputes with Russia
about dumping were from the 90s to 95s.
It was during this period that Russia
was accused of a large number
of dumping charges and did not take
into account that the country at
this time was no longer a centralized
socialist economy.
Indeed, the exporters used
some of their specific
advantages associated with
cheap raw materials and
cheap labor.
But since Russia was not yet
recognized as a market economy
at that time, these anti-
dumping processes were heard and
decisions were made on recognizing
the dumping, and Russian exporters
were punished seriously enough,
thus curbing the flow
of exports from Russia,
which at that time was
in a rather crisis
situation.
For her, of course, export
revenues were significant
and important in supporting
some economic growth.
As I said before, this is the principle
of non-discrimination, which
is implemented through the application
of the regime and the greatest favor.
In this case, having obtained this
option, Russia will be able
to protect itself from various
claims on dumping.
The principle of national regime
will allow at least to remove
the Venice amendment or some
other restrictive legislative
acts that act against
Russian exports.
The abolition of quantitative restrictions
in favor of tariffs.
In this case, this principle is already
strong enough in Russian exports
and is present in Russian imports.
The new tariff legislation
was introduced during
the last edition of 2003-2002.
During this period of time,
we tried to bring all our tariffs
in line, to prepare Russia’s accession
to the WTO and, of course, to
come to the tariffization of the system
of external economic barriers
as much as possible.
The principle of publicity, transparency
in trade and development of
foreign trade legislation is, of
course, a principle that in Russia
cannot be solved in one day.
And at least these agreements,
which are taking place within
the WTO, help the Russian
economy and Russian law to
be more outspoken and transparent.
If you look at the fundamental principles
of the following, the agreement of
the World Trade Organization (WTO),
that is, the agreements related to services,
the purpose in this case of this
agreement is the free export and
import of services, regardless of
the method of their delivery.
In accordance with this,
it is assumed that not only
commercial structures, but also
individuals can freely provide
services.
Here there is a situation that
develops in such a way that the
principle of the regime of
the greatest favor and the principle
of the national regime is valid
within this agreement so far with
exceptions, unlike the GAC, that is,
the agreement on trade tariffs.
And these principles are basically
implemented only on individual
binding countries, only on
bilateral agreements.
What sectors of the economy, what
sectors of services, to what extent
are ready to open up to foreign competition.
This includes banking
services, especially insurance
services.
As you can see, this is a big
financial interest.
Therefore, countries lobby
national, transnational banks
and corporations to limit
the free access of foreign
competition to these areas.
As for the agreement, to institutional
level prepare its legislation
and reform its legislation
to meet the requirements
of the WTO.
In particular, this applies to
the new version of the copyright
infringement law, which happened
in the spring of 2007 to eventually
reduce the flow of pirated
products that goes to the Russian
audio, video and software
market.
In this case, on the other hand,
this agreement defends the rights
of Russian producers of
similar products.
Therefore, the action of
this agreement, if we join the
WTO, pushes to make the real reality
in the field of financial
services and information
services correspond to world
standards.
Please note that the TRIPS Agreement
treats intellectual property
fairly broadly.
This includes not only copyright
and trademarks or, for example,
geographical names and the use
of product denominations.
Also included are industrial design
samples, integrated chip topologies,
and even unresolved information,
such as trade sectors.
Based on this, of course, in the
conditions of growing competition
of the modern market, in the conditions
of the development of so-called
industrial or corporate espionage,
the development of the rules of the
game and the most important follow-
up of these rules for Russia is also
a factor of increasing
competitiveness and including
the competitiveness of its products.
It is no secret that, as part
of the violation of intellectual
property rights of Russian
production, the situation in Russia
was simply deplorable during the period
of the 98th year, when this flow
of intellectual information, not
protected by copyright, literally
went west with packets and, as they
say, the market of offering Russian
technologies was simply stuck.
Based on this, of course, the inclusion
of Russia in such an adequate
international standard process
will protect not only foreign intellectual
property producers, but
also domestic, which will increase
Russia's competitiveness, and most
importantly in the long term will
allow Russia to leave such
a cliché of the factory not the
factory of the world, but the
raw material additive
of the world.
I would like to also focus on such
a component structure of the
World Trade Organization as the
development of agreements
on rules for dispute resolution.
The first is to resolve
disputes during
consultation.
In the second phase, the decision
is made by a group of experts.
In the third phase, appeals are filed
against the decision.
And the agreement on the rules
of dispute resolution is also a
rather beneficial area for Russia
after joining the WTO, as countries
are treating this dispute
resolution system with
confidence.
If you look closely, then if during
this period of the Commission on
disputes only 300 cases, only
by March 1999 has been considered
and submitted, so to speak, for consideration
167 cases.
Thus, the trust in this system
is quite high, and it is very
profitable for Russia to come
to some optimal solution that
will not contradict the
interests of the Russian country,
based on mutual international
agreements and balancing
disputes.
The next component
of the WTO agreement is the
mechanism for reviewing
trade policy.
This is a very fundamental
study, which is conducted
by WTO groups, since
1995 only 45 member
countries have been
reviewed.
That is, it is not expected that
all 150 members are subject
to a permanent review of trade policy.
45 countries are the world’s leading countries.
After all, such a mechanism forces
the public of the governments
of these countries to
look critically at the system
that in the field of state
regulation, foreign trade,
develops in these countries.
Therefore, such regular analytical
studies and reviews are
an important component of
raising the prestige of
the country, raising investment
attractiveness.
If you want trade stability and in
particular, if the country has received
some bonuses, positive assessments
as a result of such a study,
there is a proven increase in
transparency in the explanation
of trade policy, then the conclusion
of course acts as a certain
when exporting its products
and large competitors benefits
when inviting, or attracting
foreign investments
to its territory.
So, let’s see what advantages the WTO
trade system offers in the first place
in terms of seemingly general
conclusions.
See from the consumer’s point of view.
First of all, once barriers
that cross the trade borders
of different countries
are opened, it is assumed that
products begin to
move more freely, and therefore
the supply volume increases.
The growth of the supply does not mean
only the growth of the range, a
wide range of goods and services.
The increase in supply on export
imports and depreciation usually means
a decrease in prices.
And then the price drop will affect
the cost of the consumer
basket or cost of living,
which will have a positive
impact on the final consumers
of the national economy.
But we should pay attention to the
fact that the removal of such foreign
trade barriers means a price reduction
not only for goods related to final
consumption, i.e. there clothing, food,
and so on, but is related to
a price reduction for components
that are imported into the
national economy.
And although the principle of
tariff escalation, which we talked
about in the course of Mayoo, usually
applies in economies, suggests that
usually raw materials and components
are imported at lower tariffs, and
finished products are closed by
a barrier with higher tariffs.
But nevertheless, the greater
liberalization of the
import of components leads to the
fact that domestic goods that
use these components are
also becoming cheaper.
Thus, the national producer
with its commodity products
becomes more competitive
both on the domestic market
and, possibly, on the international.
Accordingly, from the consumer point
of view, the advantage of liberalization
of foreign trade is present.
Another component that indirectly
affects consumers
is the growth of exports.
It would seem that the growth
of exports is only won by the manufacturer,
but in factories, say, enterprises,
in some firms, exporters,
the Russian citizens are employed
first of all.
Accordingly, the growth of exports
means first of all the growth of
their incomes, and once their incomes
grow, the multiplier effect is
generally acting and the entire Russian
economy is beginning to grow.
The International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development, as well as
various World Trade Organization
structures, estimated that
the cost of trade barriers
is causing £500 million
of damage to British consumers
annually, and it is because
these barriers are primarily
related to textile imports.
On the other hand, Canada.
Canadians are bound by the same
agreement, in the same
direction, on imports of textiles,
too, by certain barriers.
Canadians overpay for their
clothes from -the import
barriers for textiles of
$780 million.
On the other hand, if we take
the European Union, which liberalized
barriers within its integration
group, the liberalization
of telecommunications
sectors in the European Union
led to a drop in prices on telecommunications
services on average
by 7-10%.
Thus, even without calculating the
winnings of Russian consumers in
the Russian market, there
are quite a large number of examples
of statistical calculations, which
show how much consumers lose
or win in countries, members
of the World Trade Organization
or in countries that have
entered the path of integration
within integration
unions.
If you look at the general benefits
of joining the World Trade Organization
for the country, then in general, according
to the postulates of both the theory
of international economy and economic
theory, if you remember, we and
you discussed once in the section of
state regulation of foreign trade
the arguments for and against
tariffs, so these same arguments
for and against work in the
direction that we can quite clearly
determine the direction of the
common benefits of Russia's entry
into the world trade power.
First of all, it is an increase in the
country’s income.
At the same time, the state
income increases, as the flow of
goods and taxes in this case are
collected not so much from
customs barriers, but the state
receives income from the overall
growth of the economy and,
accordingly, for example,
collects a tax on profit or
value added in a larger amount.
The state still has incomes that
are growing, and it will
not lose from the fact that
it will not collect higher foreign
trade taxes.
And, accordingly, personal incomes are
also growing, as I said before.
The owners of the factors
of production employed in the export industries
are profiting from the dispersal of
international trade.
The next benefit is the
restructuring of the economy and
in this case there will be a redistribution
of production factors in
favor of more efficient sectors
of the economy, and redistribute
in favor of owners of
production factors,
adequately, effectively
organizing their economic
process, their activities.
The third factor is the growth of employment.
First of all, of course, this is the growth
of employment in export industries, but
on the other hand, you and I have already
found out that the image of the WTO member
countries is increasing, and this increases
the stability of the image of
this national economy, increases the
expectation of transparency,
adequacy of foreign economic policy
of this country.
Thus, the influx of investment will
increase, and consequently, additional
are created, on the other hand,
in this case there is a negative
factor.
If investments do not come to
the import substitution sector, then
it is possible that the subsectors
of the import substitution sector
will not withstand international
competition, and then in
this area there will be
a reduction in employment and
job cuts, a fall in income.
Then it will be the time
for government intervention in these
problems.
The problem of structural support
for less protected industries is the task
of the state and the task of preserving
certain economic and foreign
trade barriers for the transitional
period.
The next factor of benefits is the increase
in the efficiency of foreign economic activity.
In particular, it is assumed that
if a country moves to develop
such foreign economic
legislation, even
in the process of preparation
for entry into the World Trade
Organization, which more or
less meets the standard
requirements of the World
Trade Organization, if it
unifies its legislation under
the requirements, then
the work of foreign trade
various controlling
organizations, including
customs, becomes more
adequate.
And so-called transaction
costs or costs associated
with corruption of officials
are reduced.
This gives companies the next advantage
– protection against lobbying.
Because transparent policy implies
that such a system is developed
in legislation that does not force
a double interpretation of
one or another position of the law.
Moreover, this transparent law
implies that it decides how
to act on some economic agent,
our exporter, not a official.
It does not depend on his
subjective decision.
And laws in a certain degree foreign
trade have the principle of
automatic decision.
This is why the demands of
various large financial and
industrial groups or some other
structures that try to
lobby for the protection
of their group interests
are reduced.
An example of lobbying in
the Russian market is, of course,
our automotive industry and agricultural
producers, as well
as the financial sector of
the economy.
In this regard, corruption problems
are closely linked to lobbying,
since the framework between
lobbying and demanding
such a quota rent is
often blurred.
Quota rent in this license for external
economic activity or determine the
size of quotas, it is possible
that they require their rent,
their fee for making such
a decision.
If the foreign trade law becomes
more transparent and the mechanism
of its operation becomes more
automatic, then, of course, the possibility
of receiving such quota rent
decreases.
The next benefit for the country’
s economy as a whole is
safety and standardization
of products.
Of course, I have already said
that often on some kind of
products standards of Russia
are quite high, but on the other
hand we can make, so to speak,
a whole list, a whole list
of some other types of products,
standards, which are quite
unknown.
And here, in general, again, again, we
should not go far for the example.
Take the emission standards
of our automobile
production, cars, some trucks,
this is the whole cargo
fleet.
In Europe, the standard is already in
effect beyond Euro 3, and accordingly,
the Russian, so to speak, Euro 4 has already
been adopted, and Russian cars are
still being made under the old type of standard.
Accordingly, such externalities
or rebel effects from the activities
of the Russian automotive industry
are experienced by many cities.
And, accordingly, this is the
national problem as ecology,
it can somehow move towards
its solution precisely because
of the fact that Russia will
join the WTO and, accordingly,
will enjoy certain security
standards that are accepted
in the entire civilized world.
Another important overall benefit
of Russia’s accession to the
WTO is a more stable political
situation.
After all, if conflicts related to
the flow of goods and these problems
do not accumulate, some positions do
not heat up, and the possibility of
a solution, a peaceful solution
leads to the fact that
the political situation in
the relations between countries
becomes more stable.
Of course, such a conclusion or investigation
is not necessary.
Why is?
Because I said before, when you and
I discussed the introduction
of economic sanctions, that,
for example, economic sanctions
are often the result of political
struggle.
And they themselves do not
reflect any trade disputes.
They are most likely just a weapon
in the hands of politicians
to punish one side or the other.
But, nevertheless, if we do not take
the options of introducing an embargo
or such restrictions, then, in
general, if there is a mechanism
for coordinating common decisions
within the WTO, then
the political situation without
any major economic problems becomes
more transparent and more
stable, without major crisis
situations.
The overall benefits of Russia’s accession
to the World Trade Organization are
not only related to Russia itself.
Per that is why the WTO
members agree to move the
talks, because if these countries
were not interested in Russia’
s accession to the WTO, they
would probably have countered
it in every way.
Therefore, the other side of the countries
and members are also interested
in getting access to a sufficiently
large Russian market.
Therefore, the relationship between
countries is settled by
ensuring, first of all, equal opportunities
for all members, including for
small countries, which, probably,
if they were to speak separately
in negotiations with such a
giant as Russia,, would often
have less chances for
defending their interests.
The common benefit, again, is an
effective dispute resolution
mechanism, a failure to take unilateral
action, which ultimately these
unilateral actions usually lead
to a banal trade war, when
both sides start to impose counter-
tariffs, quotas and restrictions,
and ultimately suffer
both the producer and consumer,
and the countries that
started the trade bath,
and the country that
is taking only retaliatory
measures.
The next benefit, of course,
normal development, stable development
of economic relations will reduce
the risks, for example, trade, international
trade crises, international financial
crisis, and in the end
all this strengthens international
stability and pushes
away the possibility
of such an abnormal
situation as the world economic
crisis.
Lastly, we will emphasize once again
that in this case, the risk of political
conflicts is reduced for all countries.
What is the history of negotiations
on Russia’s accession to the
World Trade Organization?
In 1993, Russia filed an application
for accession to the
then-existent tariff and
trade agreement.
And then, by the decision of the
GAD, a working group on accession was created.
The first thing that this working
group did was to study the Russian
trade regime and to elaborate
those questions, problems, these
requirements that Russia had
to fulfill in the framework
of adjusting its
foreign trade regulation legislation.
The 93th year is still a rather difficult
year in the development of Russia itself.
Therefore, of course, in the first
stages up to the 95th year,
there was no real negotiation
process, only some conditions
for further decisions
were developed.
As I said before, since Russia primarily
trade with the European Union, it
is the representatives of the European
Union that were entrusted with the
preparation of these very requirements
and conditions for Russia’
s accession to the WTO.
Only in 1998 began the initial
offers on access to the market
of goods and services and on the
level of support for agriculture,
from Russia and member countries.
These initial proposals were
adjusted for quite a while,
almost for two years, and in
fact only from the beginning of
the new millennium in 2000 all aspects
of Russia’s joining the
World Trade Organization
were burstingly discussed,
not just the problems related
to the GAD and GAC agreement.
The current working group, which
conducts, analyzes, makes decisions,
analyses the problems related to
Russia’s accession to the WTO, is
in a state of affairs.
First of all, the requirements, as
in the WTO, standard requirements
for all potential WTO members.
This group includes, of course, not
all 150 countries, not representatives
of not all 150 countries in the world,
namely those countries that maintain
the closest foreign trade relations
with a potential member, and precisely
those countries that, so to speak,
have some unconsensual issues
in this very foreign trade.
By the end of 2006, the Working
Group had 58 member countries.
At the same time, note, the European
Union was a single bloc and
considered as one country, so 58
countries are a large enough group
of countries, which include not
only developed, but also developing
countries, which are interested
in the Russian market or in importing
Russian products or from
Russian territory.
In early 2007, Vietnam
and Cambodia joined
the negotiations.
What could this be related to?
First, Vietnam and Cambodia
are large agricultural
producers.
On the other hand, Vietnam has
recently tried to intercept the world
factory squad from China.
That is, on the territory of Vietnam,
export-oriented
production of enough
clothing is organized, with the
assembly of some final consumption goods.
They joined the negotiation
process in 2007 because
the barrier issues to agricultural
products are being
resolved right now.
The number of working groups
that are working on
Russia’s accession to
the WTO is now 50 members.
These are 50 member countries,
which are the countries that are
primarily interested in regulating
trade issues.
In terms of access to
the Russian market, the group
has about 30 members.
If we summarize the situation
of the negotiation process
now, we can highlight the
following elements of this
negotiation process, which
took place in 2007.
First of all, it is currently determined
the level of binding of
the rates of roaming duties on
Russian territory.
What is the level of connection?
It is defined by different commodity
groups.
The maximum interest rate
that will beined after Russia
joins the World
Trade Organization.
So, fortunately, this process is basically
completed with all the members of the
working group.
They agreed that the initial level
of bonding of customs duties
would not be lower than the current level.
In the first year,
no tariffs will be
reduced.
The level of customs protection
of agriculture will not decrease,
and in a number of positions
Russia even has the right to raise
the tariffs a bit in this very
transitional period until 2009.
In 2009, the right to use tariff
quotas for three types of meat was
recorded - beef, pork and poultry
meat.
The technology for determining these
quotas is the current level of quotas
plus two and a half expansions
of quotas depending on the annual
growth of the supply of
meat production on Russian territory.
You know that 2006-2007 was marked by
quite bitter disputes of the European Union,
in particular Poland, over the embargo
on the import of meat from the
territory of the European Union, and
not only from the territory of
Poland, but this list includes
a number of countries.
It is because of the fact that, in the opinion
of the Russian country, certain
technical, so to speak, medical
standards have been violated.
In the future, as you can see, Russia
has at least at this stage of negotiations
obtained the right to maintain
such protectionist
measures with regard to meat
imports.
And in general, for example, the substantial
direction of the negotiations,
the negotiations on agricultural issues
came to the fact that in general, the
position of Russia has not yet been
recognized, the parties do not
agree to accept the demand or
the offer that Russia made for negotiations.
Russia proposes to fix the amount
of support for our agriculture
for the period 1993-1995.
The amount of support will
be $9.5 billion a year, but it
would seem that this is not
as much as the EU’s investments
in its negotiating countries
as the normal level of
protectionist
protection in the form
of state subsidies
for agriculture, export
or national production economy.
Moreover, the allowed amount of domestic
state support of the agricultural sector,
it does not, of course, apply to
all types of agricultural products,
but only to a certain list of the
so-called yellow basket.
This list includes agricultural
products for which
the World Trade Organization
demands a reduction
in protectionism.
The next block is the
access to the service market.
This is primarily financial
services and energy
services.
And in this respect, of course, the
struggle is due to the fact that
restricting access to the service market
is lobbied by our financial groups.
And they prove that access to the
financial market, which is not
yet so sustainable, they think
should be limited.
Consequently, these problems
are being solved during the negotiations.
The next sector is not only
financial, but also energy.
And here India advocates for access
to individuals.
India, Canada and Switzerland
are advocating for individuals’ access
to the Russian market
in certain sectors of financial and
energy services.
In principle, the negotiators concluded
that Russia agreed to open
115 services sectors out of
the 150 sectors listed by
the World Trade Organization.
But it puts forward requirements
that involve tightening the working
conditions of foreign service
providers in the Russian market.
And the next block, the last block,
concerning the negotiation process,
is negotiations on systemic issues.
This is primarily
the Russian law.
Three blocks of questions are raised.
The first.
The Russian legislation, the
requirements of the WTO in the field
of application of sanitary and phytosanitary
measures.
Mostly, we have raised these questions
with you already.
This includes not only the various
tariff quotas for meat, but also,
as the WTO working group believes,
excessive requirements for alcohol
and pharmaceuticals.
As you understand, the country that is being
targeted is Georgia, and
the country that is interested is India.
The next direction is the use
of some elements of state
regulation in the sphere
of foreign economic
activity, which, again, does
not meet the requirements
and standards of the
World Trade Organization.
The last block of requirements on
systemic issues of change of the
legal system of Russia is called the WTO+.
In principle, of course, Russia may
not pay attention to them because
they are not within the jurisdiction
of the World Trade Organization.
They are related to government procurement
of civil aviation equipment.
However, in order to eliminate possible
conflicts and subsequent problems
with the situation in foreign
trade flows, these negotiations
also take place.
What other requirements do WTO member
countries make to Russia in the
framework of mutual agreements?
This is the abolition of national
components of investment projects.
For now, it was assumed that when
direct investments are made
in the Russian market,
the property belonging to
domestic producers, the same
national component, should
also be included in this
investment process.
The next requirement is to ensure
compliance with the requirements
of the WTO, the applicable tariff
quotas.
This applies to agricultural
agreements.
This requirement involves
such agreements that
reduce their use.
The next requirement is
the organization of transactions
of sale by state trade enterprises
on a measureable basis.
And the most important requirement is not
to discriminate against foreign companies in participating
in these transactions.
This component is due to the
fact that in the developed
countries, the state
primarily distributes
state orders among domestic producers.
But within the framework of these
negotiations it is assumed that a consensus
will be developed on the video,
which will allow foreign companies
to participate in more
in government procurement
programs.
And the last essential
requirement, put forward
by the participants of the World
Trade Organization, is the question
of dual education on energy
developed hard position,
showing that we all, however,
our energy goods, energy
donors in certain volumes
and at certain stable
prices must first of all
provide national demand
of national producers.
Now we will consider the last question
of our lecture, concerning
the readiness of the Russian
market of Russian producers
to join the WTO.
On the one hand, Russian producers
were protected from foreign flow of
goods and services at the expense
of the currency component almost
in the period after the 1998 crisis.
We have been aware of the situation
in international economic relations
where the exchange rate
can act as a protectionist
barrier.
If the ruble is weak enough,
it means that you can buy a
smaller amount of dollars
or euros for this ruble and,
accordingly, a smaller
amount of goods for imports.
By 2001, the protectionism
was exhausted.
From this point of view, starting from
2001, pay attention to the scheme, the
schedule.
The Russian manufacturer is in
a situation of normal competitiveness.
And the competition of imports from
far abroad in this case has increased.
This is not a new revelation
for the Russian manufacturers.
The Russian ruble is stillining
stability and a certain
pace of growth.
This is all dependent on the
central bank’s monetary policy.
To what extent the central bank will decide
it is acceptable for the Russian economy
to deliberately intervene to reduce
the currency rate of the ruble.
Such an automatic mechanism,
which was associated with
a weak national ruble, is
now exhausted.
For the past five to six years, Russian
manufacturers have been forced
to take this into account.
Russia’s tariffs on imports of
agricultural products.
In general, despite the fact
that countries in the Conciliation
Group demand some protectionist
restrictions on agriculture,
our tariffs are quite comparable
to the restrictions
currently in force in the territory
of developed and developing
countries.
In developing countries,
tariffs on agricultural
imports are almost
19%, and in such a large
export economy as
China, even 40%.
In countries with transitional economies,
this percentage is quite high and
reaches about 16%.
In developed countries, the level
of protection of the national
agricultural market
is strong enough and, as you know,
this is the main problem in negotiations
between the EU and the United
States, negotiations between
the EU and developing countries.
The EU has raised
the protectionist protection
in agriculture
to 43.4%.
In other words, there is a prohibitive
level of tariffs.
And based on these figures, we
can say that our domestic agriculture
and agricultural producers
already operate within the framework
of a sufficiently liberalized
market for agricultural
products.
Therefore, the entry into
the WTO whileining this
level of protection for a transitional
period, and even a decrease
at a certain stage of this
level, will not bring
some unexpected outcome
for agricultural producers.
Pay attention to the slide,
which illustrates the actual level
of the import tariff.
If we consider that the so-called
weighted average rate of the import
tariff is usually calculated in
international debates and calculations,
then by 2000, gradually decreasing,
it reached an average of 2.5% in
our country.
Of course, this average is quite
conditional, because it is calculated
as a kind of average temperature
for the hospital.
One has a high temperature,
the other is already
cold.
So, the weighted average rate
is, I repeat again, now
already by 2000, and now is
still slightly below 12.5%.
But an effective import
tariff rate implies that we
also take into account the shadow
economy flows and other negative
factors that lower the
protectionist protection of
the existing tariff.
In this case, the
effective rate of the import
tariff is only about
9%.
Thus, the Russian market has already
become accustomed to working in fairly
tough conditions of competitive struggle
with imports.
The Russian proposals from the
Russian delegation at
the talks include expanding the
corridor of protectionist rates
and fixing the initial and
final level of the related tariff
bond, i.e. the upper and lower
limit of the tariff,
on industrial goods at the level
of 14.3% to 9.8%, against
the real level of 9.7% of the
average tariff.
What are the real factors
of open economy?
Of course, these are factors
that are contrary to the normal
operation of economic policy that
is developed and in line with our legislation.
First, on the one hand, these
are such negative factors as
the existence of gray schemes,
when goods produced and
designed for lower income
of the population, oriented
to some third developing countries,
fall on the Russian
market.
Accordingly, they are essentially
sold and offered under dumping
schemes in relation to our goods.
On the other hand, importers have
serious schemes of tax optimization,
which also lowers the price
level of imported goods.
The last negative component is the
boat imports, which have recently
been somewhat reduced, as
competition in the Russian market,
the growth of Russian population's
income and the increase in the
level of product quality requirements
lead to the fact that gradually
boat imports are collapsing
and becoming more organized
at the level of small and
medium-sized importers.
The next factor, which is no longer related
to the shadow economy and is in principle
subject to possible regulation by
the government in the person
of the Central Bank, is the rise
of the ruble.
As I said, a stronger and more stable
ruble, but with a tendency
to rise, usually restricts
exports and increases imports.
This factor has been working
for a year, at least since
2002.
Russian manufacturers
have also been used
to this.
According to the calculation
of independent organizations, for
six months of 2006 gray
imports were quite serious,
reaching $ 18 billion.
However, this type of imports
may decrease.
Why is?
Because if in 2005 the gray circuits
covered a large range of products,
the development of modern legislation
and its adaptation to the
WTO rules leads to the fact
that gray imports are slightly
reduced from 47% to 32%.
The central bank, however, has
lower figures, twice as low.
But in this case, we will consider that
the truth is somewhere in the middle
between the expert assessment
of specialists and the calculations
of the Central Bank.
Well, the last thing I would like to
draw your attention to is that based
on the previous slide scheme, we have
in general already developed and introduced
a fairly low level of average tariff
in the Russian economy for a number
of years, which covers
about 50% of the products.
Thus, we have solved the urgent and important
problems related to Russia’s
accession to the WTO.